>>When I was in Europe
some months ago,
I met a very remarkable
German scholar,
who had studied Buddhism in
Japan for a number of years
and was reflecting on
similarities between things
that people
experience as a result
of the study of their
Buddhism and things
that people experience in
the course of their lives
in the Western world.
And he made a very
interesting to me
about experiences that had
happened to various people
during the calamities
of the war.
He said that there were three
particular kind of instances
which he had come across, where
people had found themselves
in desperate situations.
And as a result of thoroughly
accepting these situations,
they had had an experience
of the profound joy,
and you might almost
say meaningfulness
of life, that
corresponds very closely
indeed to the kind of experience
that in Buddhism is called
awakening or enlightenment--
satori in Zen language,
or liberation in Hinduism,
or what we might sometimes
call in the West mystical
experience, the sensation
of the individual
finding himself one
with God or with the ultimate
reality behind the universe.
And my friend then enumerated
these three instances.
He said there were
the cases where
a person heard a bomb coming up.
And they heard the shriek
of the bomb descending.
And they were quite sure that
this was their last moment.
This was the end.
They accepted it completely.
They gave in to their
own obliteration.
But the bomb turned
out to be a dud,
or it missed and
went somewhere else.
And they survived.
The second kind of
instance was where
people were prisoners of war or
shut up in concentration camps,
and had come to the point
of believing that they would
never, never, never be released.
They were in a state
of complete despair.
But again, they saw
there was nothing
to do except give in to
it, accept it completely
to the point you might
almost say of affirming it.
And the same thing happened.
And then the third
instance he mentioned
was when the disorganization
and chaos at war
had so uprooted people,
had so destroyed everything
that they had built up for
themselves by way of careers,
professions, family, and
everything like that,
that they got the sensation
that life in this world
is totally meaningless, like
Shakespeare's phrase, "A tale
told by an idiot, full of sound
and fury, signifying nothing."
And again, when they
committed themselves to this,
and thoroughly accepted the
idea that life was absolutely
meaningless, there came the same
extraordinary transformation
of experience,
this sense of joy,
and in some strange
and different way,
a sense of the whole thing
really having meaning.
Now, I think that story
is very interesting,
because we in the
Western world are
so concerned that our
lives should be meaningful,
that they should make sense.
And indeed, one of the frequent
definitions of mental health
that you hear is that mental
health depends on one's
having a purpose
in life and finding
that life is meaningful.
And this is fairly
easy to preserve,
provided one's life
is not disrupted
by great catastrophes, like war.
It's fairly easy to
preserve on a small scale.
That is to say we
find it fairly easy
to make our lives meaningful
and purposive in relation
to our immediate community
or in relation to our work,
where we can do something that
is a true vocation for us,
or where in the community,
we can do things
that are helpful
to other people.
But it's increasingly
difficult to get
the sense of the fundamental
meaningfulness of things
in a universe as it is now
seen by contemporary science.
In other words, when you
enlarge the framework,
it's more and more difficult
to see any meaning in things.
Because while we can see the
significance of our lives
over a few years--
maybe 100 years,
maybe 200-- when we look at
the thing in vast perspectives,
and when we see the human race
as such a tiny little sort
of bacillus living on
an obscure piece of dust
in the remote corner
of the universe,
when we see this enormous,
almost cosmic nonsense
of galaxies, of radioactive
material going around
and around for colossal spans
of time for no apparent purpose
at all, in that perspective it's
particularly difficult for us
to believe that life is
fundamentally meaningful.
And this is a really
difficulty, because it's
so hard to see something that
has real and abiding meaning
against a background or as
part of a whole system which
seems to be basically
nonsensical.
But the interesting
thing is that when
we use these words meaningless
or purposeless of the universe,
they have a bad feeling for us.
They're sort of cuss words.
They're bad words
to use about life.
But it's very different
with people in the Far East.
There are certain schools of
thought in China and Japan
where the word purposeless,
the word meaningless
does not have a negative
connotation at all,
but rather the
contrary, something
very joyous and positive.
There's an old Chinese
philosophical text
that uses the
expression "If purpose
can be used to achieve
purposelessness, then the thing
that has been grasped."
The thing meaning the
whole point of life.
So then to understand
this point of view
in Chinese and
Japanese thought, I
think we should
investigate, first of all,
a little more
clearly just what we
do mean by purpose and meaning.
Purpose is, I think,
a word generally
used by us whereby events are
ordained to a future result.
For example, if I do
something like this,
just doing that
alone doesn't appear
to have very much purpose.
But if after I have done
that, in the future I do this,
then it appears that what
I did in such a chaotic way
in the first has purpose.
So purpose is acts
acquiring a meaning
in terms of a future to
which they are leading.
We say, I have a purpose when
I am going down to the store
in order to buy groceries.
If I'm going down to the
town for no reason at all,
then you might say my
action is purposeless.
But if I'm going
to buy groceries,
then it has a purpose.
Now, what about meaning?
The idea of meaning is very
close to that of purpose.
And this may be a good
illustration of it.
Here is the word cross.
And the word cross is a sound.
It's just a noise.
But that noise has
meaning for us,
because we know that
relates to this.
That is a cross.
But the noise cross
is not this figure.
But cross has meaning because
it represents or stands
for that actual concrete figure.
And so, at any rate,
one's sense of meaning,
which we might call here
the first sense of meaning,
is the function of a
sign, a noise or a symbol
which points to something
other than itself.
For example, if we didn't
take this as a cross,
but took it as a plus sign,
then it would, in its term,
become another sign
having meaning.
And its meaning would be
the process of adding.
Now, of course, if life has
to be meaningful in these two
senses, in the sense of
purpose already demonstrated
in the sense of [INAUDIBLE]
first sense of meaning,
then it means that
events, people,
things are only meaningful
or purposive insofar
as they need lead to something
else, or insofar as they
represent something else.
And in a way, this
makes people and things
rather like symbols and words,
which always refer to something
beyond themselves and don't
mean anything in themselves.
There's also another
sense of meaning.
And that is the sense of order.
We would look at this
object, for example,
and say, well, that's a
kind of a senseless shape.
That doesn't mean very much.
It's just a chaotic blob.
But if we introduced
order into it
by making that
object symmetrical,
we will immediately recognize
the phenomenon of pattern,
because an element of
recognition comes into it.
In other words, we
recognize the repetition
of the shape in reverse.
And this element of
recognition makes
it meaningful, patterned,
orderly in this particular way.
And so one of the dominant
ways in which a person can
say that life has meaning
is then that it has order.
But on the other hand, if
the orderliness of life
is taken too far,
we then move over
into another kind
of meaninglessness,
which we call monotony.
In other words, if every day is
the same as the day before it,
if we find ourselves
involved in routine
where we are doing
exactly the same job
day after day after day, we
find that through an excess
of order, our life
begins to lose vitality.
And so it seems that we
need a kind of disorder
in order to give life to order.
We need a kind of
nonsense in order
to make things
really meaningful.
We need chaos as an
essential element of life.
Now, in the Western
world, we tend
on the whole to emphasize order.
We are always pushing
things to make sense.
We are always trying to control
the world and make it obey us,
and therefore make it orderly.
And after all,
science is primarily
a study of the
regularities in the nature,
a study of natural order.
But to a considerable extent in
Far Eastern thought, especially
in Taoist and Buddhist
thought, the emphasis
goes the other way.
There is an emphasis not so
much on the beauty of order
as the beauty of a certain
kind of disorder or nonsense.
You see, look at
this that I drew
just before I started
to make the face.
This chaos of lines up here is
like life in certain aspects.
So much of life is
this sort of thing,
which does not become
this sort of thing.
Events that don't seem
to make any sense at all.
But the Chinese and
Japanese eye has
been able to look at this sort
of phenomenon, which we would
call nonsense phenomenon,
purposeless phenomenon,
in a way that begins to reveal
a profounder kind of meaning
in it.
Take, for example,
one of the greatest
of the Japanese painters,
the artist Sesshu, who
was a Buddhist priest
living between about
the beginning of
the 16th century.
Actually, his dates
are 1421 to 1506.
And this is a very, very
famous painting of his.
But as you look
at it, you may be
inclined to feel that it's
very like the mess which
I drew that eventually
turned into somebody's hair.
Because Sesshu did
paintings of this kind
very often with fistfuls
of straw instead of brush.
But as you look at that
thinking more carefully--
it's done in black
ink on paper--
you begin to realize that this
is a natural scene, that we
are looking at a
system of rocks.
And far above
them, very faintly,
there is a few mountain peaks.
That is called the [? haiboku ?]
or rough technique landscape.
And as you begin to
recognize what it represents,
you begin, perhaps, to feel
that it has some meaning.
And yet why do we feel that
those at-first-sight chaotic
lines have meaning when we
discover that they represent
a natural scene, a mass
of higgledy-piggledy rocks
and trees, which in themselves
do not have meaning in quite
the senses that I
have so far defined?
After all, if a word like
cross represents an object,
what do rocks represent?
What do trees represent?
What do mountains represent?
Do they symbolize something?
Do they have some purpose in
that they are intentionally
working to produce
a future result?
Do the waves
washing on the shore
and making strange patterns
of foam on the sand
have some intention?
Are they symbolizing anything?
No.
But then why does the artist so
often copy the forms of nature?
Surely he does it because
he is paying a tribute
to a certain kind
of meaninglessness,
a certain kind of joyous
purposelessness in nature.
And this fact of
our being constantly
fascinated by the
freedom of natural forms
from having to mean something,
from having to make sense,
that is a kind of relief to us.
And so there is
a Chinese saying,
which is that the
beauty of a mountain
is that it's much
like a mountain.
The beauty of water is that
it's so much like water.
They have this way of putting
it in a little figure.
"Mountain gets mountain."
And then you write it across.
"Water gets water,"
meaning after all,
a mountain is wonderful because
it's so much like a mountain.
Water is wonderful because
it's so much like water.
And thus it is the quality of
the the whimsical waywardness--
shall we say, the wandering
quality, the undesigned quality
in all these things that pleases
us in so marvelous a way.
And this has been picked up by
the artists of the Far East.
After all, wandering,
doing something
with no particular purpose,
just strolling down
the street looking at the
sky, or sitting and twiddling
your thumbs.
This, in a way, it is
always an expression
of fullness, or
profound content,
and there's a kind of prejudice
against wondering in our world.
What happens if you got
out in a big city nowadays,
and you're just wandering.
You're going nowhere.
And a cop stops you.
Where are you going?
Why, I wasn't going anywhere.
Ah, don't tell me that.
People who aren't
going anywhere,
people who are not certain
where they're going,
people who are
just wandering, are
regarded by our civilization
as rather dangerous.
But look what we're missing.
Here is a very marvelous
example of wandering.
It's a print by a great
contemporary Japanese
who died a year or two
ago, Sabro Hasegawa.
He made this print from
pieces of an old boat that
were washed up on the beach.
And he rubbed them with ink
and printed them on paper.
And what he especially
wanted to reveal
was the beauty of the
simple wandering lines
of the grain and the wood.
He, in other words,
had an insight,
which is the same
insight Sesshu had
when he did that rough
landscape, an insight
into the essential joyousness
of wandering lines.
That print in its outline is
not made to represent anything.
It isn't a symbol of anything.
It's just for one to look
at and enjoy for itself
with no purpose
whatsoever beyond it.
One also finds a similar
kind of thing in calligraphy,
in certain ways of writing
Chinese characters.
And this sort of rough,
undisciplined, jazzy way we
would say of writing
Chinese characters.
Of course, they have meaning,
because the words actually
are a poem.
But what is especially
attractive to connoisseurs
of fine writing is not only
the meaning of the poem,
but the character
in the strokes,
the vitality, all
those little hairlines
of the brush dancing
on paper in what
appears to be a kind
of haphazard tracking
of the brush.
And because we have
begun to see the beauty
of this kind of
thing for ourselves--
to some extent, tutored
by Far Eastern artists--
we can also recognize
the splendor of, say,
the forms of driftwood, such
as this piece that stands here.
Nowadays, many people
are going along
to the beach and collecting
objects like this
to put in their houses,
where the wood charms us
because of its strangely
chaotic, and again,
nonsensical,
meaningless outline.
And this sort of thing was also
brought to a kind of perfection
by the great ceramic
artists of Japan.
When they made
something like this--
this is a ceremonial tea bowl
for chanoyu as it's called,
or tea ceremony.
And once upon a
time, a potter who
was making one of these
bowls had an accident.
He let the glaze run
on it by mistake.
I don't know if you
can see on this bowl
that the glaze here
is just a blob which
has run down the
side of the bowl.
The first man to
whom that happened,
many hundred years ago, thought,
oh dear, it's a mistake.
But then he looked
at it and realized
that the unintentional,
the nonsensical mistake,
was peculiarly beautiful.
And thereafter there
has grown a tradition
of ceramic art in Japan
which, as it were,
capitalizes on what will
happen when the glaze runs all
by itself.
So this art of natural nonsense
is a kind of perception
that the beauty of the
world is that it's a dance.
And just when we dance, we don't
dance in order to go anywhere.
We don't dance in order to get
to the other side of the room.
We dance just to go round
and round and round.
And so it is in
the same way when
we look at the outlines
of the mountains.
What do they mean?
They mean just whoop, whoop,
whoop, whee, whee, whee, whoop
whoop, like that.
And that is the delight of it.
In other words, this
nonsense of quality of life
begins to make its appeal
to us, begins to show us
its hidden meaning
and its hidden beauty.
When we don't, as it were,
pick a quarrel with the world
and try to make
something of it--
you know our own slang
is often so revealing.
When somebody says
to you, do you
want to make something of it?
That means the situation
is definitely hostile.
And so likewise, when our
constant attitude to the world
is that we want to
make something of it,
we want to force
it to make sense,
it to make order,
then to that extent the world
hides its meaning from us.
And we find a greater
meaning when we are able,
like the person in the story
I told at the beginning,
like the person who found
that life was senseless
and profoundly accepted
its senselessness,
he converted that nonsense
into a kind of joy.
Now, after all, this isn't
really foreign to, say,
Christian ideas.
It's true that we hear a great
deal in Christian teaching
about the purposes of God.
But surely there
is a deeper secret
within Christian teaching,
that the purposes of God
lead in the end to
purposelessness.
After all, isn't it the
historic, ancient doctrine
of Christianity that the true
purpose or the true end of man
is to behold the vision of God.
And then you might ask,
what is the purpose of that?
If people find themselves in
Heaven, face to face with God,
do they look at God
and say, so what?
No.
According to ancient
Christian symbolism,
they join with the
saints and the angels
in singing hallelujah,
hallelujah, hallelujah!
Well, the word hallelujah
once meant something.
But what it means now
is celestial whoopee.
It's an expression of sheer joy.
It's a babble.
It's like the sound of a brook.
And we love to listen
to the babble of a brook
because it's a joyous sound
that just doesn't mean anything
at all.
You see, God in that sense
does not need to mean anything,
because he is complete.
He has no future
purpose to fulfill.
He is not a symbol
signifying something.
But in the Far Eastern ideas
of which I have been speaking,
life is regarded
in the same way.
Life itself, the mountains, the
stars, the rivers, the trees,
the earth, our very selves
and our own behavior,
they are not looked upon
as mere signs leading
to something else, mere
existences about which we
must always say, so what?
Where are you going?
They are regarded as being
in a state of fulfillment
at every moment.
And it is as Goethe said, "The
highest to which man can attain
is wonder.
And if these prime phenomenon
of life make us wonder,
that is the limit.
No more should we ask."